R-0.0.1 (#89)
bob-crutchley/notes: topics/git/modules/merging/README.md

<!--PROPS
{
    "estTime": 30
}
-->
# Merging
<!--TOC_START-->
### Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
	- [Merge conflicts](#merge-conflicts)
- [Tasks](#tasks)
	- [Handling Merge Conflicts](#handling-merge-conflicts)
		- [Initialise a Repository for Testing Merge Conflicts](#initialise-a-repository-for-testing-merge-conflicts)
		- [Create a Branch with a Conflict](#create-a-branch-with-a-conflict)
		- [Attempt to Merge the New Branch](#attempt-to-merge-the-new-branch)
		- [Resolving the Conflict](#resolving-the-conflict)

<!--TOC_END-->
## Overview

> Joining two or more branch histories through `git merge` incorporates changes into the current branch. This command is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Joining the history of two or more branches through `git merge` incorporates changes into the current branch. This command is 
```

> used by `git pull` to incorporate changes from a different repository as well as to merge change from one branch into 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used by `git pull` to incorporate changes from a different repository, as well as to merge changes from one branch into 
```

another.

> If we assume that we have a history like this and the current branch is **master** :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we assume that we have a history like this, and the current branch is **master** :
```

```
      E---F---G issue
     /
A---B---C---D master
```

> By executing `git merge issue` would result in adding (E, F, G) changes into master and result in a new commit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Executing `git merge issue` would add changes E, F and G into master and result in a new commit.
```

> , ending up in the following history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new commit would end up in the following history.
```

```
      E---F---G issue
     /         \  
A---B---C---D---H master
```
### Merge conflicts

> Merge conflicts happen when more than one person edited a file and the line numbers that were affected are the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Merge conflicts happen when more than one person has edited a file, and the line numbers that were edited are the same
```

> . It Can also happen if someone deleted a file another person was working on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. It can also happen if someone deleted a file that another person was working on.
```

> This conflict only affects the person doing the merge, the rest of the team wouldn't be affected by it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This conflict only affects the person performing the merge, and the rest of the team wouldn't be affected by it.
```

> If the merge conflict happens, *Git* will automatically halt the merge process and mark the file or files that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a merge conflict happens, *Git* will automatically halt the merge process and mark the file, or files, that are
```

>  being conflicted, it is then up to the developer to resolve them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 conflicting. It is then up to the developer to resolve them.
```

## Tasks
### Handling Merge Conflicts
You will now go through the steps required to cause a merge conflict.
#### Initialise a Repository for Testing Merge Conflicts
1. Open a terminal
2. Create a new directory by executing `mkdir git-merge-conflict`
3. Change directory by executing `cd git-merge-conflict`
4. Initialise this directory as a git repository by executing `git init .`
5. Create a new text file *hello.txt* in the directory

> 6. Add some text like "hello world" to the *hello.txt* file, save and close the file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Add some text, such as "hello world", to the *hello.txt* file. Save and close the file
```

> 7. Now you need to make git track changes for the *hello.txt* file, execute the following command to do this `git add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Now you need to make git track changes for the *hello.txt* file, which can be done by executing the `git add
```

>  hello.txt`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 hello.txt` command
```

> 8. Now you need to create a save point which is known as commit and will have the current state of the *hello.txt file, execute the following command to achieve this `git commit -m "initial commit"` </br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Now you need to create a save point, which is known as a commit. This will have the current state of the *hello.txt file in it. Execute the `git commit -m "initial commit"` command to achieve this </br>
```

![Fork >](https://imgur.com/cm8Oky3.png)
#### Create a Branch with a Conflict

> Now that you have a repository and a master branch with a file on it the next step is to create a new branch which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have a repository and a master branch with a file on it, the next step is to create a new branch to
```

>  will be used to cause the merge conflict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 use to cause the merge conflict.
```

 
1. Checkout a new branch by executing `git checkout -b new-branch`

> 2. Open the text file *hello.txt* and add a new line to it with text like "making a change to the file", your text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Open the text file *hello.txt* and add a new line of text to it, such as "making a change to the file". Your text
```

 file should now look like this:
```
hello world
making a change to the file
```

> 3. Let's make Git keep track of the hello.txt file to which we made the change by executing `git add hello.txt`.Now you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Let's ensure Git keeps track of the hello.txt file that we a change to. This can be done by executing the `git add hello.txt` command. Now you
```

Author: ```suggestion
3. Let's ensure Git keeps track of the hello.txt file that we made a change to. This can be done by executing the `git add hello.txt` command. Now you
```

>  need to commit again, but this time with a message that reflects the change made `git commit -m "made a change to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 need to commit again, but this time with a message that reflects the change made - `git commit -m "made a change to
```

>   hello.txt file"`. The change we made will now try to override the changes in master branch for the text file *hello.txt*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  hello.txt file"`. The change we made will now try to override the changes in master branch, for the text file *hello.txt*.
```

> 4. A change to the text file *hello.txt* is required now before we can cause a merge conflict, let's go back to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. A change to the text file *hello.txt* is now required before we can cause a merge conflict. Let's go back to
```

>  *master* branch by executing the following command `git checkout master`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 our *master* branch, by executing the `git checkout master` command
```

> 5. Open the text file *hello.txt* and add a new line to it with text like "making a bigger change", your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Open the text file *hello.txt* and add a new line of text to it, such as "making a bigger change". Your
```

 text file on master should now look like this:
```
hello world
making a bigger change
```

> The *hello.txt* on branch *new-branch* should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *hello.txt* on the *new-branch* branch should look like this:
```

```
hello world
making a change to the file
```

> Let's commit the change we made to the *hello.txt* file to the master branch, first execute `git add hello.txt` then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's commit the change we made to the *hello.txt* file to the master branch, by executing `git add hello.txt` followed by
```

>  execute `git commit -m "modified hello.txt file"`. </br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `git commit -m "modified hello.txt file"`. </br>
```

![Fork >](https://imgur.com/y6GoKCn.png) 
#### Attempt to Merge the New Branch

> Now what we want is to merge changes from *new-branch* to *master* branch, but can Git figure out which version of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we want to merge changes from the *new-branch* branch to the *master* branch. However, Git won't be able to figure out which version of
```

>  the second line to use? The answer is that it can't, this will cause a merge conflict and the developer will be responsible for resolving it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 the second line to use - we have created a merge conflict! The developer will now be responsible for resolving this.
```

> 1. Let's cause the actual merge conflict by executing the following command `git merge new-branch` you should get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Let's go ahead and actually cause the merge conflict, by executing the `git merge new-branch` command. You should get an output
```

>  output about merge conflict similar to this:</br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 similar to this:</br>
```

![Fork >](https://imgur.com/yFzxuUD.png)

> 2. Let's take a look at the contents of the *hello.txt* file now, it should look similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Let's take a look at the contents of the *hello.txt* file now, which should look similar to this:
```

```
hello world
<<<<<<< HEAD
making a bigger change
=======
making a change to the file
>>>>>>> new-branch
```

> What is visible is that the first line `hello world` doesn't have a conflict, but there is a conflict between the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main thing to recognise is that the first line (`hello world`) doesn't have a conflict, but there is a conflict between the
```

>  second lines of the *master* and *new-branch* branches version for the second line of the *hello.txt* file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 second line of the *master* and *new-branch* branches.
```

#### Resolving the Conflict

> To resolve the merge conflict there are a couple of steps needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To resolve the merge conflict, there are a couple of steps needed:
```

> Firstly, decide which second line to keep: `making a bigger change` or `making a change to the file`, similarly you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, decide which second line to keep out of `making a bigger change` or `making a change to the file`. You could also
```

>  could choose something entirely different such as keeping or deleting both lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 choose something entirely different, such as keeping or deleting both lines.
```

> Secondly, delete the lines *Git* added to show where the merge conflict is happening `<<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Secondly, delete the lines *Git* added, to show where the merge conflict is happening `<<<<<<< HEAD
```

`, `=======`, `>>>>>>> new-branch`. 

> Let's say you decide to keep the second line that's currently in *master* branch, after cleaning up the file it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say you decide to keep the second line that's currently in *master* branch. After cleaning up the file, it
```

>  should look like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 should look like this:
```

```
hello world
making a bigger change
```

> Next you need to save the changes made and that can be done by executing two commands: `git add hello.txt` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you need to save the changes made. This can be done by executing the `git add hello.txt` command, followed by
```

>  then `git commit -m "resolved merge conflict"` </br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 the `git commit -m "resolved merge conflict"` command. </br>
```
